Small tidying work for coherently invertible maps (#1024)
UniMath/agda-unimath: src/foundation-core/coherently-invertible-maps.lagda.md

```text
               R ·r g
             --------->
  g ∘ f ∘ g             g.
             --------->
               g ·l S
```

We will colloquially refer to invertible maps equipped with this coherence for
_transpose coherently invertible maps_.

**Note.** Coherently invertible maps are referred to as
{{#concept "half adjoint equivalences"}} in _Homotopy Type Theory – Univalent
Foundations of Mathematics_.

On this page we will prove that every two-sided inverse `g` of `f` can be
promoted to a coherent two-sided inverse. Thus, for most properties of
coherently invertible maps, it suffices to consider the data of a two-sided
inverse. However, this coherence construction requires us to replace the section
homotopy (or retraction homotopy). For this reason we also give alternative
constructions showing

1. The identity map is coherently invertible.
2. The composite of two coherently invertible maps is coherently invertible.
3. The inverse of a coherently invertible map is coherently invertible.
4. Every map homotopic to a coherently invertible map is coherently invertible.
5. The 3-for-2 property of coherently invertible maps.

> That appropriately preserve the data of the underlying two-sided inverse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these constructions preserve the data of the underlying two-sided inverse.
```

## Definition

> ### The predicate of being coherently invertible on maps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The predicate of being a coherently invertible map
```

## Idea

A [(two-sided) inverse](foundation-core.invertible-maps.md) for a map
`f : A → B` is a map `g : B → A` equipped with
[homotopies](foundation-core.homotopies.md) ` f ∘ g ~ id` and `g ∘ f ~ id`. Such
data, however is [structure](foundation.structure.md) on the map `f`, and not
generally a [property](foundation-core.propositions.md). One way to make the
type of inverses into a property is by adding a single coherence condition
between the homotopies of the inverse, asking that the following diagram
commmutes

```text
               G ·r f
             ~~~~~~~~~~
  f ∘ g ∘ f             f.
             ~~~~~~~~~~
               f ·l H
```

We call such data a

> {{# "coherently invertible map" Agda=coherently-invertible-map}}. I.e., a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{#concept "coherently invertible map" Agda=coherently-invertible-map}}. I.e., a
```

      ( is-section-map-inv-is-invertible H)
      ( is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H)

  transpose-coherence-is-invertible : UU (l1 ⊔ l2)
  transpose-coherence-is-invertible =
    coherence-is-transpose-coherently-invertible
      ( f)
      ( map-inv-is-invertible H)
      ( is-section-map-inv-is-invertible H)
      ( is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H)

  is-coherently-invertible-coherence-is-invertible :
    coherence-is-invertible → is-coherently-invertible f
  is-coherently-invertible-coherence-is-invertible coh =
    ( map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      is-section-map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      coh)

  is-transpose-coherently-invertible-transpose-coherence-is-invertible :
    transpose-coherence-is-invertible → is-transpose-coherently-invertible f
  is-transpose-coherently-invertible-transpose-coherence-is-invertible coh =
    ( map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      is-section-map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      coh)
```

## Properties

### Invertible maps are coherently invertible

The construction follows Theorem 4.2.3 in _Homotopy Type Theory – Univalent

> Foundations of Mathematics_.

Reviewer: The original formalization of this fact actually didn't really follow the HoTT book. It included several optimizations, and the one I formalized was the one from my book. Did you change anything about the formalization so that it is now the one from the HoTT book?

Author: Ah, I'll have a look. And I'll change the reference.

Author: I should really get to reading your book soon 😶‍🌫️

Reviewer: There were many things I have thought hard about in order to do the more efficiently. This was one point where I made some optimizations. In some cases the HoTT book proofs are a lot longer than in my book or than in the library (the proof that equivalences are embeddings is another such example). So to simply state that we're following the HoTT book when we've actually been doing a lot of work to make things better feels like short selling our work.

Author: I definitively see that. The proof that is there was based on the previous formalization. Then I compared to the HoTT book and thought they were the same. Sorry about that, and thanks for catching it

Reviewer: Of course, the HoTT book is still the correct reference to many facts (including this one), but still in the proof we make some different choices here and there.

  map-inv-is-coherently-invertible : B → A
  map-inv-is-coherently-invertible = pr1 H

  is-section-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible :

>     f ∘ map-inv-is-coherently-invertible ~ id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    is-section f map-inv-is-coherently-invertible
```

  is-section-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible = pr1 (pr2 H)

  is-retraction-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible :

>     map-inv-is-coherently-invertible ∘ f ~ id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    is-retraction f map-inv-is-coherently-invertible
```

    is-retraction-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible
      ( is-coherently-invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map)

  coh-coherently-invertible-map :
    coherence-is-coherently-invertible
      ( map-coherently-invertible-map)
      ( map-inv-coherently-invertible-map)
      ( is-section-map-inv-coherently-invertible-map)
      ( is-retraction-map-inv-coherently-invertible-map)
  coh-coherently-invertible-map =
    coh-is-coherently-invertible
      ( is-coherently-invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map)

  section-map-coherently-invertible-map :
    section map-coherently-invertible-map
  section-map-coherently-invertible-map =
    section-is-coherently-invertible
      ( is-coherently-invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map)

  retraction-map-coherently-invertible-map :
    retraction map-coherently-invertible-map
  retraction-map-coherently-invertible-map =
    retraction-is-coherently-invertible
      ( is-coherently-invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map)

  is-invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map :
    is-invertible map-coherently-invertible-map
  is-invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map =
    is-invertible-is-coherently-invertible

>       ( is-coherently-invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map)

Reviewer: I would personally just drop `map-` in the middle of each of these names.

  invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map : invertible-map A B
  pr1 invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map =
    map-coherently-invertible-map
  pr2 invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map =
    is-invertible-map-coherently-invertible-map
```

> ### The predicate of being transpose coherently invertible on maps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The predicate of being a transpose coherently invertible map
```

      ( is-retraction-map-inv-transpose-coherently-invertible-map)
  coh-transpose-coherently-invertible-map =
    coh-is-transpose-coherently-invertible
      ( is-transpose-coherently-invertible-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map)

  section-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map :
    section map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map
  section-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map =
    section-is-transpose-coherently-invertible
      ( is-transpose-coherently-invertible-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map)

  retraction-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map :
    retraction map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map
  retraction-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map =
    retraction-is-transpose-coherently-invertible
      ( is-transpose-coherently-invertible-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map)

  is-invertible-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map :
    is-invertible map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map
  is-invertible-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map =
    is-invertible-is-transpose-coherently-invertible
      ( is-transpose-coherently-invertible-map-transpose-coherently-invertible-map)

> 

Reviewer: I would again just drop `map-` in the middle of each of these names

  coherence-is-invertible : UU (l1 ⊔ l2)
  coherence-is-invertible =
    coherence-is-coherently-invertible
      ( f)
      ( map-inv-is-invertible H)
      ( is-section-map-inv-is-invertible H)
      ( is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H)

  transpose-coherence-is-invertible : UU (l1 ⊔ l2)
  transpose-coherence-is-invertible =
    coherence-is-transpose-coherently-invertible
      ( f)
      ( map-inv-is-invertible H)
      ( is-section-map-inv-is-invertible H)
      ( is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H)

  is-coherently-invertible-coherence-is-invertible :
    coherence-is-invertible → is-coherently-invertible f
  is-coherently-invertible-coherence-is-invertible coh =
    ( map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      is-section-map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      coh)

  is-transpose-coherently-invertible-transpose-coherence-is-invertible :
    transpose-coherence-is-invertible → is-transpose-coherently-invertible f
  is-transpose-coherently-invertible-transpose-coherence-is-invertible coh =
    ( map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      is-section-map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      coh)
```

## Properties

> ### The inverse of a coherently invertible map is transpose coherently invertible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The inverse of a coherently invertible map is transpose coherently invertible and vice versa
```

> The inverse of a coherently invertible map is transpose coherently invertible.
> Of course, there is also a converse construction, and since these are defined by
> simply moving data around, they are strict inverses to one another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inverse of a coherently invertible map is transpose coherently invertible.
Conversely, the inverse of a transpose coherently invertible map is coherently invertible.
Since these are defined by
simply moving data around, they are strict inverses to one another.
```

This is better, since it states explicitly the converse with little extra effort.

                ( f)
                ( map-inv-is-invertible H ∘ f)
                ( is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H)) ∙h
              ( left-whisker-comp²
                ( f)
                ( inv-coh-htpy-id (is-retraction-map-inv-is-invertible H))))
            ( is-section-map-inv-is-invertible H ·r f)))

  abstract
    coh-is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible :
      coherence-is-coherently-invertible
        ( f)
        ( map-inv-is-invertible H)
        ( is-section-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible)
        ( is-retraction-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible)
    coh-is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible =
      inv-htpy inv-coh-is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible

  is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible : is-coherently-invertible f
  is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible =
    ( map-inv-is-invertible H ,
      is-section-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible ,
      is-retraction-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible ,
      coh-is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible)
```

This result is known as
[Vogt's lemma](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/homotopy+equivalence#vogts_lemma)

> in point-set topology.

Reviewer: If this is about the previous lemma, could you move this reference up so that is shows above the code along with the other informal sentence?

We also get the transpose version for free:

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 : Level} {A : UU l1} {B : UU l2} {f : A → B} (H : is-invertible f)
  where

  is-transpose-coherently-invertible-is-invertible :
    is-transpose-coherently-invertible f
  is-transpose-coherently-invertible-is-invertible =
    is-transpose-coherently-invertible-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible
      ( is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible
        ( is-invertible-map-inv-is-invertible H))
```

> ### Coherently invertible maps are embeddings

Reviewer: I think it is better to split this up into two sections

`### Coherently invertible maps are injective`

`### Coherently invertible maps are embeddings`

We first construct the converse map to the
[action on identifications](foundation.action-on-identifications-functions.md).
This is a rerun of the proof that maps with
[retractions](foundation-core.retractions.md) are
[injective](foundation-core.injective-maps.md) (`is-injective-retraction`). We
repeat the proof to avoid cyclic dependencies.

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 : Level} {A : UU l1} {B : UU l2} {f : A → B}
  (H : is-coherently-invertible f) {x y : A}
  where

>   map-inv-ap-is-coherently-invertible : f x ＝ f y → x ＝ y

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be better to call this `is-injective-is-coherently-invertible`? A user who is looking for the fact that coherently invertible maps are injective would not necessarily look for it under this name.

            ( ( ap (f ∘ map-inv-is-coherently-invertible H) p) ∙
              ( is-section-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible H (f y)))
            ( ( ap-binary
                ( _∙_)
                ( inv (coh-is-coherently-invertible H x))
                ( inv (ap-id p))) ∙
              ( nat-htpy (is-section-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible H) p)))))

  abstract
    is-retraction-map-inv-ap-is-coherently-invertible :
      map-inv-ap-is-coherently-invertible ∘ ap f ~ id
    is-retraction-map-inv-ap-is-coherently-invertible refl =
      left-inv (is-retraction-map-inv-is-coherently-invertible H x)

  is-invertible-ap-is-coherently-invertible : is-invertible (ap f {x} {y})
  pr1 is-invertible-ap-is-coherently-invertible =
    map-inv-ap-is-coherently-invertible
  pr1 (pr2 is-invertible-ap-is-coherently-invertible) =
    is-section-map-inv-ap-is-coherently-invertible
  pr2 (pr2 is-invertible-ap-is-coherently-invertible) =
    is-retraction-map-inv-ap-is-coherently-invertible

  is-coherently-invertible-ap-is-coherently-invertible :
    is-coherently-invertible (ap f {x} {y})
  is-coherently-invertible-ap-is-coherently-invertible =
    is-coherently-invertible-is-invertible

>       ( is-invertible-ap-is-coherently-invertible)

Reviewer: This proof involves a coherent replacement of the previous proof. Would it be beneficial in any way to give a direct proof of the coherence?

Author: I've thought a little about it, and without having inspected the construction in much detail, I can't see why it should be beneficial to give a more direct proof. As we spoke about yesterday, though, perhaps the construction is more direct for transpose coherently invertible maps?

Author: I had a second look, and couldn't find an immediate way to make the proof simpler using transpose coherently invertible maps. That's not to say it's not possible, I just didn't see it immediately.

Author: Do you want to add a remark that we want a proof that avoids replacement?

Reviewer: No it's ok:)

```

> ### Coherently invertible maps are coherently invertible in both senses

Reviewer: This is unclear. Do you simply mean to say that coherently invertible maps are transpose coherently invertible? In that case it would be clearer to say so:

```suggestion
### Coherently invertible maps are transpose coherently invertible
```

The proof follows Lemma 4.2.2 in _Homotopy Type Theory – Univalent Foundations
of Mathematics_.

> **Proof.** By naturality we have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Proof.** By naturality of homotopies we have
```

```text
                   gfRg
     gfgfg --------------------> gfg
       |                          |
  Rgfg |  nat-htpy R ·r (R ·r g)  | Rg
       ∨                          ∨
      gfg ----------------------> g.
                    Rg
```

We can paste the homotopy

```text

>   g(inv-coh-htpy-id S) ∙ gHg : Sgfg ~ gfSg ~ gfRg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  g (inv-coh-htpy-id S) ∙ gHg : Sgfg ~ gfSg ~ gfRg
```

```

along the top edge of this naturality square obtaining the coherence square

```text
             gfgS
     gfgfg -------> gfg
       |             |
  Rgfg |             | Rg
       ∨             ∨
      gfg ---------> g.
              Rg
```

There is also the following naturality square

```text
                   gfgS
     gfgfg --------------------> gfg
       |                          |
  Rgfg |  nat-htpy (R ·r g) ·r S  | Rg
       ∨                          ∨
      gfg ----------------------> g.
                    gS
```

Now, by pasting the first square to the second along the common edge `Rgfg`, we
obtain

```text
            gfgS           gfgS
      gfg <------- gfgfg -------> gfg

>        |             |             |
>     Rg |            Rgfg           | Rg
>        ∨             ∨             ∨

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       |             |             |
    Rg |             | Rgfg        | Rg
       ∨             ∨             ∨
```

I'm not really fond of description style labeling of arrows in ascii diagrams, unless there is really no space. For example, you have an arrow head without a bit of an arrow line which doesn't look so good. In this diagram there clearly is the space for a conventional label, so it is better to stick to what is conventional.

      ( ap-concat-htpy'
        ( R ·r g)
        ( coh-transposition-coherence-is-coherently-invertible)) ∙h
      ( inv-htpy (nat-htpy R ·r (R ·r g))) ∙h
      ( ap-concat-htpy
        ( R ·r (g ∘ f ∘ g))
        ( left-unit-law-left-whisker-comp (R ·r g)))

  abstract
    coherence-transposition-coherence-is-coherently-invertible :
      coherence-is-transpose-coherently-invertible f g S R
    coherence-transposition-coherence-is-coherently-invertible =
      ( ap-concat-htpy'
        ( R ·r g)
        ( inv-htpy (left-inv-htpy ((g ∘ f ∘ g) ·l S)))) ∙h
      ( assoc-htpy (inv-htpy ((g ∘ f ∘ g) ·l S)) ((g ∘ f ∘ g) ·l S) (R ·r g)) ∙h
      ( ap-concat-htpy
        ( inv-htpy ((g ∘ f ∘ g) ·l S))
        ( inv-htpy (nat-htpy (R ·r g) ·r S))) ∙h
      ( inv-htpy
        ( assoc-htpy
          ( inv-htpy ((g ∘ f ∘ g) ·l S))
          ( R ·r (g ∘ f ∘ g))
          ( g ·l S))) ∙h
      ( ap-concat-htpy'
        ( g ·l S)
        ( ( vertical-inv-coherence-square-homotopies
            ( R ·r (g ∘ f ∘ g)) ((g ∘ f ∘ g) ·l S) (R ·r g) (R ·r g)
            ( naturality-square-transposition-coherence-is-coherently-invertible)) ∙h

>           ( right-inv-htpy (R ·r g))))

Reviewer: We have the tools to do this sort of things much more efficiently now. Let me fire up vscode and find out exactly what to use. But in principle, if you find lots of squares and reassociations and whiskerings in your construction, then that's a sign that better infrastructure should be available because you don't have to do that by hand anymore.

Author: As I said to you in person, I'm actually very happy with how these proofs turned out. I did try to apply the infrastructure for commuting squares, but ultimately decided to remove it because I found my proofs looked better without them.

```text
    Hgf' ∙ fgH ~ HgH ~ f'gH ∙ Hgf
```

constructing the two homotopies is equivalent to constructing coherences of the
squares

```text
            fgH                        Hgf
     fgf' -------> fgf          f'gf -------> fgf
      |             |            |             |
  Sf' |             | Sf     f'R |             | fR
      ∨             ∨            ∨             ∨
      f' ---------> f            f' ---------> f
             H                          H
```

However, these squares are naturality squares, so we are done.

```agda
  coh-section-is-coherently-invertible-htpy :
    (H ·r g ∙h S) ·r f' ~
    horizontal-concat-htpy' (H ·r g) H ∙h ((S ·r f) ∙h inv-htpy H)
  coh-section-is-coherently-invertible-htpy =
    ( left-whisker-concat-htpy
      ( H ·r (g ∘ f'))
      ( right-transpose-htpy-concat (S ·r f') H ((f ∘ g) ·l H ∙h S ·r f)
        ( ( ap-concat-htpy
            ( S ·r f')
            ( inv-htpy (left-unit-law-left-whisker-comp H))) ∙h
          ( nat-htpy S ·r H)))) ∙h
    ( ( ap-concat-htpy
        ( H ·r (g ∘ f'))
        ( assoc-htpy ((f ∘ g) ·l H) (S ·r f) (inv-htpy H))) ∙h
      ( inv-htpy

>         ( assoc-htpy (H ·r (g ∘ f')) ((f ∘ g) ·l H) ((S ·r f) ∙h inv-htpy H))))

Reviewer: This looks suspect to me as well. A more direct proof should be available with the new infrastructure for whiskering and squares.

  coh-retraction-is-coherently-invertible-htpy :
    horizontal-concat-htpy' (H ·r g) H ∙h ((f ·l R) ∙h inv-htpy H) ~
    f' ·l ((g ·l H) ∙h R)
  coh-retraction-is-coherently-invertible-htpy =
    ( ap-concat-htpy'
      ( f ·l R ∙h inv-htpy H)
      ( coh-horizontal-concat-htpy (H ·r g) H)) ∙h
    ( assoc-htpy ((f' ∘ g) ·l H) (H ·r (g ∘ f)) (f ·l R ∙h inv-htpy H)) ∙h
    ( ap-concat-htpy
      ( (f' ∘ g) ·l H)
      ( inv-htpy (assoc-htpy (H ·r (g ∘ f)) (f ·l R) (inv-htpy H)))) ∙h
    ( left-whisker-concat-htpy
      ( (f' ∘ g) ·l H)
      ( inv-htpy
        ( right-transpose-htpy-concat (f' ·l R) H ((H ·r (g ∘ f) ∙h f ·l R))
          ( inv-htpy (nat-htpy H ·r R))))) ∙h
    ( ap-concat-htpy'
      ( f' ·l R)
      ( inv-preserves-comp-left-whisker-comp f' g H)) ∙h

>     ( inv-htpy (distributive-left-whisker-comp-concat f' (g ·l H) R))

Reviewer: Same here.
